From Hansel minutes.com it's Hansel
minutes or weekly discussion with
web developer and technologists. Scott
Hanselman hosted by Carl Franklin. This
is Lawrence Ryan announcing show number
65 recorded Saturday may 19
2007. Support for Hanselman is
provided by Tellerik rad controls,
the most comprehensive suite of
components for windows forms and
asp.net web applications. online@wwwdottelerik.com. Support
is also provided by dotnet
developers journal. The world's leading.net
developer magazine online at www
dot  dot com. In
this episode, Scott talks with
Martin Fowler, David Heinemeier Hansson
at the rails conference in
Portland. Hi, this is Scott
Hanselman and this is another
episode of Hansel minutes. We're
here in Portland, Oregon, my
hometown at the rails conference
at the Oregon convention center.
And I am sitting in
a little area here off
the side of the exhibit
hall. If you hear some
background noise that's because the
exhibit is bouncing here at
rails conference, and I am
sitting with David Heinemeier Hansson
and Martin Fowler. How are
you guys doing? Doing great.
Yeah, just cool. All right.
That is the extent of
the wasting of time. We
shall commence, you know, yesterday
at the booth here at
the ThoughtWorks booth, we had
kind of an interesting conversation
and to turn into a
bit of a, of a,
of a mud wrestling match.
And I thought we had
a pretty good time. It's
too bad. We didn't tape
that. But yeah, David, I
had, I had brought up
the issue that I thought
maybe HTML has seen its
day. Like I'm tired of
pushing angle brackets around that
are really using ineffective small
constructs and you didn't agree.
No, I know. And I
very much enjoy the current
standards we have for creating
applications. I think the low
level of expressiveness that we
have in HTML and CSS
and JavaScript is actually a
huge bone to most applications.
That constraints are a good
thing. That constraints leads to
better applications when we don't
need to reinvent everything. When
you just have a blank
canvas where you can paint
whatever you want on it,
you pretty much end up
with, with something quote unquote
original every time. And I
don't think originality in UI
design is necessarily a good
thing. I just think actually
most of the time it's
a bad thing. And more
importantly, in terms of HTML
and CSS for the developer,
I think those are great
tools. I do not want
to go back to the
desktop world. And I actually
kind of resend that notion
that HTML and CSS and
JavaScript are dirty technologies from
the perspective of desktop developers,
who've been used to a
more cleaner development experience somehow,
but I don't think clean
translates to pleasant in that
sense, Clean and dirty within
are using that to describe
the developer experience or the
under the underlying stuff that
is being abstracted away. Cause
the desktops just as messy
as the You're seeing it
is that people conflate those
two issues. They see HTML
and CSS is dirty languages
or implementations because there are
bugs in different browsers and
so on. And then they
kind of bleed that into
development experience because HTML or
JavaScript has issues in various
browsers. That should also mean
that the development process itself
has started. I think that
that's not really true. I
think the HTML and CSS
style development is actually incredibly
friendly and clean to developer.
It's a really easy way
to get applications going because
you don't have all the
options of the world. You
don't have a blank canvas
that you can paint anything
on. So you have to
use the pure, simple building
blocks that are available. And
once you take that creativity
out of it, things just
become a lot simpler. They
become, there's not so much
confusion about what to do.
There's a lot of conventions
in HTML on how to
build information applications, which means
that you don't have to
think about all that stuff
over and over and over
again, which is in essence,
the same argument we have
for rails. Why are conventions
a good thing because you
don't have to make that
sin decisions again and again.
Well, you're, you're saying that
the universal building blocks too,
to draw a weak analogy
that the corks that we
have discovered so far are
adequate, but there's always the
talk that there might be
something else out there. Is
there life beyond checkboxes and
radio buttons? Is there an
input type equals that we
haven't discovered yet that is
going to make the molecules
that we build from all
of this fundamentally more compelling?
And I think that's great
and it's called research. And
I don't think we should
conflate research with day to
day development. And I think
first of all, like we've
already had that blank canvas
for 10 years on the
web with applets with flash,
with a bunch of other
technologies that gave us a
blank can, which we could
dream up anything we wanted.
Did we get better input
models? No, I like we
just have 10 years of
history showing us that someday
we might end up on
that great breakthrough, but it
hasn't happened yet. So I'm
not going to hold my
breath, waiting for silver light
or Apollo to deliver that
if it happens and if
this break great breakthrough does
happen, it's wonderful. I'm not
going to reject that. I'm
going to stick with HTML
for all eternity. I'm just
saying we have history of
10 years showing that kind
of unsettling innovation has not
come out of the blank
canvas. I'm not going to
hold my breath. And I'm
happy with the tools I
use Martin you're nodding your
head. You agree? Yeah. I
mean, from the early days
of Web interfaces and the
people have always Said, well,
this is so inferior to
what we can do with
a rich client kind of
application. And what we've seen
is certainly my sense is
from the user side, people
being actually quite comfortable getting
used to the, the HTML,
Oh, this application works like
a web thing that therefore
I know already kind of
how to work with it.
And also developers finding the
whole web model, actually working
quite well for them. And
I'm not in, in, in
that sense, what my sense
has been of it is
the people have not been
super keen to join, move
towards the full desktop experience.
There's been occasional flourishes of
it, but they haven't really
followed through. And so again,
if you just kind of
drawing from where we are
so far, well maybe yeah,
there could be some really
compelling advantage with some of
these technologies, but you know,
I'm inclined to bet the
way things have gone before
until, and be wrong one
time out of 10, But
doesn't, it seem like kind
of a schizophrenia thing that
we've got barrel and the
Linux world doing amazing things
with 3d. We've got the
, which has been gorgeous
for years. And just yesterday
I dropped a dashboard widget
onto the background and this
wonderful kind of drop of
water affect appeared. We've got
Vista doing similar 3d things.
Here are three operating systems
on the desktop. That really
feels strongly that there's some
new way of visualization that
could provide not just comfort
for the user, but presumably
some additional functionality, But still
Applications like, like, like David,
like here's a 37 signals,
very clean, crisp, simple, they
flourish is that kind of
split brain that you're saying
that that's okay. People have
a mental model for the
web and they have a
mental model for the desktop.
I think they're doing it.
I think it's interesting in
all the examples that you
mentioned of interesting effects going
on on the desktop, I
think most of them are
just because we can, they're
not about adding functionality just
because you can drop something
on the dashboard. It makes
an idea cause ripple effect.
I don't think any real
users really care. I think
geeks go Gaga over that
because we have this super
powerful graphics processor and it's
being used greatly in games
or simulations or any of
these other visualizations, a media
and people feel like shouldn't,
we also be using it
for applications and they can't
come up with anything better
than ripples when you drop
something on the dashboard. And
I don't think that's a
representation of good UI design.
And I think that's why
a lot of the stuff
currently going on with, with
Ajax is that people kind
of discovered it, Whoa or
JavaScript can now actually give
us kind of the same
things. And they went overboard
and a lot of cases.
So even just with the
limited possibilities we have in
something like JavaScript, people already
went too far. So I
don't think we need even
more blank canvas, even more
water effects on droplets. I
think we need to focus
on less things. And I
think the great thing about
HTML And CSS and the
ease of use of just
creating basic applications, encourages people
to just stick with the
basics. And I think most
people can't handle blank canvases.
This is one of the
reasons I traditionally in web
applications have not been a
big fan of rich text
interfaces. When you give people
the tool to make something
purple and in comic sense,
they will put it in
purple in comic sense. I
think MySpace is the perfect
example of what happens when
you give people all the
. Yeah, exactly. And I
think we don't even need
to look to my space.
Look at the world of
flash applications. Flash is wonderful
for media and enables a
bunch of things, but when
you actually get down to
application design, it's usually, So
what do you think about
people that are, I guess
you would call them researchers
then that are pushing the
limits on, on how user
experience should be. It should
be expressed. Like we talked
about that worry dream.com the
magic ink manifesto, where they
gave an example of a
train scheduling application that used
the basic pieces available to
us in HTML. It's basically
a screen full of check
boxes and combo boxes, and
then a, a more designer
focused user experience focused ex
experience that this particular individual
said that it's flash it's
something like that, that you're
going to need to make
that experience reality. You think
that's, I think that's very
much an education. That's the
biggest problem I have with
the whole re blank slit
movement is that it's being
billed as though we're rebooting
the web as though this
is the full new paradigm
for application design. And I
don't see it as such.
I see it as, this
is the two to 5%
case for widgets, not application
widgets. There are some widgets,
a plane where you want
to pick your seat, something
where you want to remodel
a virtual room in Ikea
to see how your furniture
aligns. Great, which is awesome
for that. And it's also
worth remembering. A lot of
what we really need to
do is we need to
improve the overall interaction experience
and talking about the eye
candy and the colors and
the icon design is only
a part of that picture.
I mean, you've got to
look much more at the
entire interaction that you have
with the application. And the
idea is that people who
are focusing on that level
of interaction design, thinking about
the entire picture, I think
here with people like Jesse,
James Garrett and his stuff on
information architecture, my colleague Jeff
pattern has been writing a
lot about how to bring
user centered design in an
agile context. These, I think
are going to make a
much bigger difference because it's
going much, much deeper than
just the, the, just the
pictures and the, the eye
candy. And, and you're saying
that the kinds of thought
being put around those kinds
of experiences are going to
be able to use the
existing tools we have available
in HTML CSS. And there'll
be just as compelling. I
think we can get more
improvement by focusing on the
full picture kind of stuff
that they're doing than just
splashing a lot more. I
Can do it. I have
no doubt, but somebody will,
at some point come up
with an incredibly new visual
Watts it, and there'll be
one of these researchers shooting
off and doing this stuff.
I mean, 95% of that
research is complete waste of
time. But of course we
don't know which 5% is
the good bit. So we
have to engage the whole
a hundred percent. But I
think when we're looking at
sort of bang for buck,
I would rather be focusing
on the people who are
looking at a deeper interaction
design stuff. I would want
to be listening to folks
like Jeff Patton or Jesse James Garrett, rather
than getting familiar with more
and more widget toolkits. So
looking at this kind of
a triangle of individuals here
myself as interviewer I'm I'm
hearing and tell me if
you think this is an
incorrect, I'm paraphrasing here, but
that, that David you're concerned
about making the developer experience
as pleasant and wonderful as
possible. Given the existing interaction
elements we have available to
us and, and user Martin
are focused on making the
process as pleasant as possible,
enabling the people doing the
right kind of research around
that kind of stuff while
I'm over here, kind of
blustering about, you know, but
can't there be more, I
wish there was more star
Trek. Where's that interface? Why
don't I have a touchscreen?
I think they kind of
go hand in hand. I
think when developers get tools
that are blank slates, they
get obsessed about them. Like
they direct all their attention
on all their focus on
making new water ripple effects
and that's time taking away
from just core interaction design.
When you're restricted in your
visual or visual expression tools,
you tend to focus on
something else you tend to
focus on just is this
something users can use in
a more direct fashion. And
I think that that's really,
we haven't even optimized the
HTML application yet. So before
you made that as good
as it can be, I
don't think we need all
these other tools. I think
that like, we've got to
learn how to do a
walk before we can run.
And we are still crawling
when it comes to HTML
application, are we even running
in the right direction, right?
That too, To, to, to
what you thought works does,
and you guys provide a
complete, if I understand correctly,
you can provide the complete
development experience. You can provide
architectural consulting in that in
you're largely thought of as
a, as a thought leader
in the, in the process
space is the development process
broken with respect to the
user experience like user experience
is not built into the
process. And in general, in
the world of it, the
development process is broken just
about every access you might
want to look at. That's
why I asked certainly one
of those breakages is in
the whole user experience side
of it. And thinking about
how to, to work with
the, the, the way in
which people are using an
application. I think, I mean,
there is a community of
people that, that really try
to focus on that, but
trying, trying to let that
fit with the rest of
the development process, particularly the
way we like to work
with a very incremental and
agile style approach. That is
an area that, that needs
a good bit of work
at the moment. And it's
an area we've been pushing
hard. I mean, we've got
a number of people who
are in very, very interested
in interaction design, a one
blogger. For instance, what I
would recommend taking a look
at is Mark McNeil, who has
written some really good stuff
about focusing on what exactly
it is people need to
do. And again, it's concentrating
on this entire interaction. What
is somebody trying to do?
How do we make that
simpler for them and the
special effects and the eye
candy are, they're kind of
cool, but they're less important.
So yesterday we saw at
the ThoughtWorks booth kind of
a spontaneous demonstration by ward
Cunningham of some interesting visualizations
about the user experience. And
I thought that we were
all kind of impressed by
that. And there's some spontaneous
applause that kind of happened
at the, at the end
there. Do you think that
this was a visual tool
that showed swim lanes, all
a UML sequence diagram, except
as you hovered over each
of the actors, you saw
what that individual and what
a user would see at
that point in the interaction.
And I, when I saw
that, I said, that's a
tool that I don't have.
I have nothing like that
in my process at all.
And Martin is nodding his
head furiously here. Do you
have something you want to
add? Well, no. Other than
I was, I mean, this
is a typical piece of
wood Cunningham brilliance. I mean,
how many times has word
Cunningham, just come up with
something that, you know, you
look at it and you
think, wow, that's way too
simple and obvious. And why
is it? We haven't thought
of that for the last
10 years. And that's yet
another moment of just knocking
my, I mean, I'm used
to having my, I mean,
knock back by ward. I
mean, if I'm not clobbered
by award idea every couple
of years now, I'm surprised
When I saw that it
really made me it seeing
it, that that visceral act
of, of actually witnessing like,
wow, I see where this
kind of a tool and
this kind of expression of
what that tool is trying
to get across could really
fit into my development process
right now, because I think
that people focus so much
on user stories and use
cases. And then sometimes the
experience, whether it be the
experience of a screen or
as word was trying to
tell us about the entire
interaction, the entire workflow really
gets scribbled on a, on
a napkin and then sent
off to a designer to
make rounded corners. I think
that's a huge part. And
I think that's one of
the most flawed aspects of
modern web application development is
the fact that designers are
thought of as painters. And
there's just people who have
to layer something on top
of what we already have.
That's completely reversed of how
it should be. So the
way we develop the staff
at 37 sequels is interface
first development. We do not
start on any programming before
we have final HTML screens
that are ready to be
hooked up. And I really
think that that's the way
it has to be. Because
even at the level of
constraint that HTML gives us,
it still matters greatly how
The elements are put together.
Is this a radio button?
Is this a dropdown field?
Do you split it into
one screen? Do you split
it into two screens? How
does validations work? All of
these decisions happen often off
the cuff by programmers, because
they're just putting the programming
together thinking, well, the designer
will make it pretty. And
if you think of the
signers, as people who make
stuff pretty, that's exactly the
path that you're going to
be let down. And you
still wonder why can't people
figure out how to use
my application. He made it
pretty it's pink and it
has round corners. And that's
just not what the sign
is supposed to be. Yeah.
I've always used the comic
book metaphor where the developer
thinks that they're the penciler
and then someone else is
going to lay down the
ink and the color. But
of course, what they've penciled
out is a bunch of
crap. Exactly. And I think
that that's just, we need
to change that first. So
that's why I actually think
in parts to why HTML
and CSS is so wonderful
because it puts the tool
of the design of real
screens into the hands of
designers. It's not a programming
exercise. And even more importantly,
if you split those two
things up, if you make
the construction of the UI
so hard that you need
programmers to do it, what
you'll end up with is
the sinus drawing on cardboards.
You'll end up with people
working in Photoshop and we've
been there. That was how
web design looked from 95
to 99, Sit up and
in Dreamweaver. And everything's okay.
Exactly. And that's just exactly
the wrong way to go
about it. Because a designer
who works in Photoshop works
in a different medium than
the web. When you can
make rounded corners easily in
Photoshop, when that's just a
function of Photoshop, you will
do it when you're the
designer is forced to work
in the natural construct of
the web with HTML and
CSS, they won't do things
that are pushing against a
grain of those materials. So
it's kind of asking people
to make sculptures in clay
and they have to work
with steel afterwards. They have
to be implemented in steel.
That's just not how you
get good construction, good art,
good. Anything you need the
people who are making the
decisions of how it should
work to work as closely
as humanly possible with the
real materials. It's the final
product. Now, some people might
say that too often prototypes
have become actual code, but
I'm hearing you say that
they're probably writing the S
the HTML that becomes the,
our HTML. They're right. They're
writing this in static. HTML,
are they writing this in
rails? They're designers? Yeah, The
designers and the style we
follow is usually there goes
one screen. The first screen,
or the first few screens
are done in completely a
static HTML, but very, very
quickly thereafter, we wrap it
up, make it dynamic, replace
a few things, inject the
loop, and then design it
from that point on, make
all their evolution into real
product. They'll make it inside
of the HTML to has
sprinkled Ruby across it. And
they'll deal with that. And
what I'm actually finding is
that we have this misconceptions
Of designers who will scream
and runaway the first moment
they see code. And it's
just not true in a
lot of ways, code help
stir them, do their job.
Like now there's dynamic real
pieces of data. They don't
have to use Laura Ipsen
to fill it up with
crap. And I think that
that's another issue. We haven't
even talked about the notion
of using real data, using
a real running application as
guiding your development and design
process. And that that's a
very good segue into thinking
about how a design first
and a user interface. First
philosophy fits into a continuous
integration process. You know, are
the designers, the designers are
part of the process. They're
checking in assets. They're things
are building. And now you
can certainly break a build
when a, when a test
is wrong, how do you
test if a designer did
something incorrect? And is that,
is that, is that a
spec? Is that, So to
me, there is no spec
to me, the spec is
the interface screens. So we're
big believers in saying no
to functional specs because there's
nothing functional about functional specs.
The only functional part is
a real running application. So
we try to get to
real running applications as soon
as humanly possible. And then
that's the spec. So what
were the way the application
works right now is supposed
to be the way the
application works right now. And
if we disagree, we change
the real application. We don't
go back and try to
find some spec and rewrite
some of that change, the
real application set and modify
performance. Yeah. That's a very
important thing. I want to
reiterate this when David is
saying designer first, he's not
talking about the way that
some people would think that
his designer first, which is
the designers go off for
a couple of months and
produce designs for every single
webpage in the application, and
then hand it over. We're
talking, I'm imagining. So I
haven't talked to him about
this, but a designer is
doing the stuff for the
design. That program is turning
it around and we're talking
a matter of hours or
maybe days in the complete
turnaround of the application. And
that's the very tight iterative
process, which I think is
very key to this because
you can't imagine what this
whole thing looks like. It's
much. You've got to build
it and see it and
change it and alter it
and make it so that
altering the existing application is
your normal way of look
So change. Yeah. Change happens
all the time. You're constantly
in flux, but you, but
at the same time, we
don't ever want to break
the application. I was thinking
about this in a clean
code talk, Robert Martin, uncle Bob
was saying that you make
the tiniest little changes. How
do you, how do you,
he kept saying, well, when
you re you, even when
you rip the guts out
of the thing, whether it
be designer, guts, or code
guts, you don't want to
break it. And I kept
thinking why that was happening.
Well, sometimes you really do
have to pull. You can't
pull a heart out. Oh,
well, no, no. You can
do amazing changes if you,
if you just figure out
how to do it in
this small step, the application's
always alive. I mean, we
look at the mingle, the
project management tool we've been
working on On that tool.
I happen to know that,
I mean, they have a
test base is twice as
much as they're at code
base. So two thirds of
the code in that product
is tests and now allows
them to do quite violent
things. I know that a
couple of months ago they
made a very fundamental change
for the database scheme. I
mean, we're talking utterly to
the guts of the database
scheme and that's the kind
of stuff I'm concerned about.
And I did that and
I mean, it wasn't even
an event worth talking about
and when they were planning
to do it, they were
saying, yeah, yeah, we've got
to fundamentally alter the core
tables in this application. Yeah,
we'll do that. I mean,
it's not a big deal.
And what was, what, what
scaffolding, what was set up
to allow that to succeed?
I mean, people were involved.
Processes were involved development environment.
There was a, there was
a set point of health
of the, our overall organization,
the overall project that enabled
that if anything was a
bit dodgy, it wouldn't have
succeeded. It would be interesting
to ask him more detail
the team about that. I'm
several thousand miles distance, but
my sense comes down to
it's the way the team
works. It's the discipline of
the way they work. They're
very anal about testing. They're
very anal about integration. They're
working very closely together, then
making sure the app is
always alive, always working and
they figure out how to
make these little changes. And,
and of course the other
thing that helps is a
very modular application rails kind
of forces you into a
well-designed modular application. That's one
of its great strengths. And
you know, these are people
who follow through with that.
That's he just made a
very interesting point when he
said, which was kind of
a throwaway statement. That rails
makes it easy to have
a marginalized, you know, well
thought out application for the
asp.net developer, who probably is
listening to this. When they
go file new web project,
they get a config file,
a bin folder where all
their DLLs go, and then
it's pretty much up to
them. Exactly. They get a
blank slate. And my big
issue is against blank slate.
Because most of the time,
you don't want to reinvent
everything from scratch. There's a
huge amount of decisions you
don't care about making over
and over and over again.
I think coach structure and
organization is one of those
things. So rails doesn't give
you a blank slate. It
gives you a file cabinet,
a full file cabinet where
everything kind of has its
place from day one. You
don't have to invent a
new organizational scheme for ever
project. And the problem is,
even though people could reuse
these things, most humans, didn't
just not that structured. The
only way you get that
kind of structure is by
forcing it in and forcing
it upon people. So HTML
is forcing people to use
the same kind of organization,
the same kind of approach
to application development by having,
by giving them a file
folder. There are only these
input fields. There are only
these core types you can
work with. So people do
and they get consistent applications
where users can jump from
application to application and still
know what's going on. Rails
does exactly the same thing
for code organization, for approaches
to development. We give you
the file cabinet. So you
have to actually make the
choice to throw that file
cabinet out. If you want
to start from scratch and
nobody wants to do that.
So you goat people into
doing the right things by
making it harder to do
the wrong things. So it's
not that rails gives you
the opportunity of having better
organization. It's really makes it
almost impossible not to have
that. You have to make
an active statement to get
bad organization. Now that's, you're
going to add something Martin.
Yeah. I want to flip.
That was one of the
things I really liked about
rails. So I don't know
how many times I've started
a new project in the
new environment thing. Okay. Where
shall I put my source
files? Where should I put
this? And rails just does
it for you. You just
hit the button and away
it goes. And there is
an equivalent in the dotnet
world, a tree surgeon, which
a colleague of ours wrote
with Mike Roberts. And it does
a similar kind of thing.
But the point with rails
is that it's really deeply
in the psyche of, of
every rail's development project. It's
very hard to go against
that grain. That is true
in the, in the.net world.
And you do spend a
lot of time kind of
setting up your, your desktop,
you know, rearranging icons. I
kind of think, you know,
get your  make files
set up, make sure that
you're even the notion of
development versus test versus production.
Those things are not necessarily
baked in. Now you had
said something interesting, David, when
you said that you kind
of go to people into
doing the right thing, and
I wanted to talk to
you guys about this kind
of sense of are we,
you, you seem to have,
you guys have, seem to
have successfully used peer pressure
to make people write better
code. I mean, the community
has a sense of beauty.
I still haven't been able
to put my finger on
it about what beautiful Ruby
code is. At least that
Americans, right? That, and you
had commented the Japanese people
write very different Ruby code
and it has a different
sense of beauty. They, they
do. And that's actually interesting.
So beauty is very much
a cultural term and it's
very culturally relative. So one
community will think something is
beautiful and another community will
think something else is beautiful.
And I'm kind of just
seeing that split, looking at
some Japanese Ruby code where
I think, huh, that's interesting.
That's a very different approach
than we take in a
lot of the rails code.
For example, it doesn't mean
that one thing is better
or worse than another. It
just means that it actually
strengthens your sense of aesthetic
when you can identify different
branches of beauty. And we
have a particular branch of
beauty in, in rails code
and we have a particular
branch of thought on how
you should organize your projects.
And the thing is, it's
not just peer pressure, it's
actual code it's actual structures.
So the peer pressure comes
in terms of when you
generate a new model, you
cannot choose not to have
a test for that model
is simply not an option
for the generator. It will
generate a test file for
you. So it's that peer
pressure comes in form of
fundamental structures we have in
the rails set setup. You
don't get to choose testing
from you. Don't get a
lot of these things are
just not options. We have
opinions about these things. So
it's not to say you
can, you can't avoid it.
You certainly can. But if
you're just following the flow,
if you're just getting into
rails, if you just want
to learn and know what's
going on, you'll just run
the default commands and you'll
see what's going on. Huh?
They generate a test falls
for me. I guess that
means I should be testing.
And that just flows people
into good manners without forcing
them. So it's not peer
pressure in the police have
a smoke or take a
line of Coke. It's peer
pressure in the sense of
like, why shouldn't I do
this? I get something back.
That's good for me. And
I I'm new here. I
I'll do as they do
in Rome. Huh? So within
the, within the rails community,
there's this, there's this correctness.
There's a sense of beauty.
The sense of smell kind
of came with the environment
so that a newbie, even
a few months into it
starts to have a sense
of what's right. And what's
wrong when he sees something
that's potentially outside the norm.
He, he knows as well.
I remember when I was
working, I worked at, at
Nike 10 years ago doing
Java and we had, sometimes
we got so wrapped up
in, Oh, for  sake.
We kind of forgot about
the, kind of the, the
big picture I I've noticed
in the.net world. A lot
of people are doing that
a little bit with interfaces.
They're just thinking everything in
the world can be solved
with an interface and a
provider and a, a pluggable
model. I've been trying to
get my head around that,
that, whereas our communal sense
of code smell and how
does that fit into, how
can I use that in
the development process? It's, it's
interesting that even, even things
like naming it's, it's baked
into the system, I think
name is a huge thing.
I think it's one of
the most important skills you
gonna have in programming is
being good at picking great
names. And I think by
the fact that we force
you to call something, acts
that we have pluralization, for
example, which I think to
most people, if they had
heard the idea of front,
they would think of Explain
that to the listener. They
may not know what that
is. Pluralization and rails works
in the sense that models
are singular. So you have
class person. And now the
place where these people go
to sleep, what is that
called? It's called the people
table. So we pluralized pretty
much anything to do that
conversion. You have person goes
to people, you have goat.
It goes to goats projects
to projects. You have a
table somewhere or a dictionary.
We actually reversed engineered the
English language, polarization scheme to
a fairly high degree. We
have something like 95% hit
rate on that. And pretty
much a hundred percent on
the common words that people
use, tasks and projects and
all of these. We actually
had a very interesting debate
at one point on how
to portalize octopus. We actually
have that. Now there's a
special rule just for octopus
to have an octopus model
model will look for an
eye to pie table. So
that's the kind of the
level of it just got
fun. It got fun in
the way that we care
about these things so much
and people today, wouldn't it
be easier if you just
had person and person there
wouldn't be any translation. There
wouldn't be this big scheme
for Florida the station, but
no, really. We made a
point that we prefer those
aesthetics. I prefer the aesthetic
of pluralization. My collections are
plural, so my tables should
be plural too. So we
went through all this effort
just to make a point
about aesthetics matter. Well, you
decided to care about a
particular thing. I mean, I
w yeah, and I think
this is something as well.
That's come from the whole,
the way the Ruby community
has grown up, particularly in
the U S where the
people who went into Ruby
early on were people who
did care about this kinds
of thing. I mean, not,
not just David, but also,
you know, the prags have
always cared. A great deal
about writing code is writing
to his programmers program. A
book. What we've seen is
the people that got into
Ruby tended to be people
who cared a lot about
the design, about expressiveness, it
attracted likeminded people, and that
generated the kernel of that
whole community around that degree
of, of caring about that
stuff. And I think we're
seeing we're reaping the benefit
of that at the moment.
I think actually in, in
large ways, we had a
huge fuss at one point
in the rails community about
pluralization people saying, this is
crazy. This is the worst
feature about rails. And in
some ways they're true from
a technical perspective that it
doesn't really make sense, but
it was kind of a
firewall. It was a firewall
for aesthetics. So if you
could not appreciate why we
did this, why we chose
to go through all of
this work to get prettier
code, maybe you weren't yet
in the state of mind,
that was a good fit
for this community. So we
try to weed people out,
in some sense, if they
don't share the same cultural
bias, if they don't share
the same values, then maybe
they're not a good fit
for the rails community. And
we try to put those
decisions very upfront. So you
don't have to get six
months into Ruby and rails
to realize, Hey, maybe I
don't share the cultural values.
We have to cultural values
on the door of the
entry. So you're not going
to walk into this house
if you don't somewhat respect
these values or can learn
to appreciate them. Yeah. The,
the, the passion definitely seems
to be built in, I
mean, this is, this is
my first rails conference in
Portland here, and it is
a very passionate crowd. It
doesn't appear to be any,
everyone has an opinion here.
Well, again, look at the
origins of the, of the
community and what made.net popular.
Microsoft told you this is
going to be the next
big thing. What made Java
popular IBM and sun told
you, this is going to
be an expert thing. What
made Ruby popular? There was
no corporation backing. I would
say that it was using
Godins idea virus Idea, that
there was a vacuum out
there of pain. And the
pain was the lack of
beauty and lack of comfort
for the developer. And that
vacuum sucked in a large
amount of people, But it
was very much a grassroots
thing. I mean, there's been
no, I mean, the closest
thing you've got to big
corporates is ThoughtWorks and we're
only 800 people for goodness
sake. I mean, there isn't
that in the Ruby community
that will change. Those pressures
will come in. But, but
like in a, in software
development, a big system depends
a lot on those early
iterations that set the tone,
the, how the rest of
the system will be built.
My hope is that what
we're doing with Ruby the
early days are gonna create
the such a Colonel around
Ruby and rails that will,
as it grow, helps set
the tone for community, but
will continue to follow the
kinds of things that David's
talking about. Now, thinking about
the, the growing of this
nascent community and thinking about
the size difference that you
just did, kind of a
juxtaposition between Microsoft and thought
works as Microsoft brings things
to bear like this dynamic
language runtime, is it possible
for someone as big as
Microsoft, 40,000 people now, I'm
not sure they're big to
get involved in such a
way that people would actually
respect some of the things
that they would offer. I
think most technical Communities respect
a real contributions of any
kind. And that's really where
it rests on for the
Ruby and rails community. In
general, there's definitely a bias
against Microsoft because they there's
a long history. There's a
long history of events and
actions that that company took
that was not appreciated. Let's
say it mildly like that
by the open source community
in general and the Ruby
on rails community in particular,
that doesn't mean it can't
change. For example, sun forced
Java, a lot of people
and, and Ruby and rails
is a rebellion. And in
some sense against that kind
of culture, but doesn't mean
we don't appreciate J Ruby.
For example, Sana stepped up
and paid people to, to
work on furthering a compiler,
a runtime for, for Ruby.
That's not the default C1.
You don't see any bun
batting dad. I mean, that's
a good thing because they
stepped up, did a real
contribution and then they earned
some respect. So that's usually
how you do it. Microsoft
definitely has to work harder
for that. They have a
much, much higher mountain to
climb in that sense of
regaining some respect from this
community, but nothing is impossible.
There's a, there's definitely a
sense of a, of a
significant inflection point coming up
at the moment. We've I
think part of it and
a large part of it
is the growth of dynamic
languages in general, Ruby in
particular, and a sense of,
we can really change the
way in which we think
about corporate it. And we
want to get rid of
the, the bloat ware and
the stuff that's out there.
What I've seen from sun
Is a really great willingness
to engage with that. And
the whole J Rubian enterprise
hiring some of the leading
Jay Ruby developers and letting
them do the job, the
decision to absolutely implement Ruby
the way it is so
that you can take a
C Ruby application complex one
like rails applications and run
them on J Ruby. That
was exactly the right thing
to do. Now, the question
that has been answered by
son, kind of for the,
for the Java community, interestingly
by sun, not by IBM.
Now, the questions shifts back
to Microsoft, can, will they
do the same thing for
the CLR? Microsoft has done
many things over the last
couple of years that shows
a, an openness to deal
with what I think is
the reality of the open
source movement, instead of trying
to deny it and push
it back that begin to
open up a little bit.
And if that trend continues,
we could well see a
good Ruby implementation on the
CLR. On the other hand,
we have the 235 patents
fiasco. And if that's the
attitude of Microsoft, then the
mountain has just got a
lot bigger. And the point
is the future is developers.
And I, I know that
there is concern in, in
places in Microsoft that they've,
they've lost the attention of
the alpha developers and that
that's in a, in the
medium longterm is going to
kill them. And I think
their reaction to open source
in general, their reaction to
Ruby in particular, that's going
to make a big difference
for Microsoft's future, The, the
characterization of the alpha developer
and that it was in
the medium and longterm that
it's almost has kind of
an insidious quality to it.
It's like there is a,
there's a bit of a
diaspora happening. It seems, and
people, the alpha developers, the
alpha dog at the company
is, is, is missing something
that sense of beauty that
we talked about before. And
if, if Microsoft doesn't join
the conversation in some substantive
way, they might wake up
the next day and find
that that guy's not there
anymore. Yeah, It's interesting. I
mean, we had ThoughtWorks, we
got heavily into.net, decided to
get heavily into.net when.net came
out, it was a big
deal at Fort works, you
know, wherever, a lot of
geeks and developers like us
off, not terribly popular. We
were solidly in Java. It
was quite a risk to
get involved in.net, but we,
we did, and we've done
quite a lot of.net projects.
What we've noticed very recently
is particularly in the U
S a notable falling off
in.net project starting. Now, we
don't know whether this is
just it's, it's fairly recent.
We don't know whether this
is a blip or a
trend, but we're noticing it
and thinking, Hmm. People who
come to ThoughtWorks tend to
be wanting to be pushing
the edge that tells us
that maybe people don't think
dot nets, the original Java's
going along perfectly fine. It's
steady. Ruby is a huge
surge. I mean, for 40%
of our new business this
year, Wasn't it a sense
that Java has plateaued over
the last two or three
years? Okay. I think so.
Yes, there are us, but
the intriguing thing is not,
not hasn't plateaued it's declined.
And that surprises me. And
I just said, I don't
know whether it's a blip.
It could just be the
way things are going, but
it also could be a
sign of, of what Paul Graham
has said. You know, Microsoft
is dead because they're no
longer dangerous. Who knows? I
don't know. I think it's
a great point in terms
of what developers alpha geeks
or whatever they choose to
work on has serious repercussion
for everything else. So even
if Ruby on rails is
tiny blip on the, in
the larger scale and picture
of things compared to 6 million
Java developers and how many
million Microsoft developers it matters,
who is not just a
conversation about the numbers. And
I think we're seeing the
same thing with Ruby on
rails. As we, in some
sense, we're seeing with agile
and with XP people leave
companies to work in more
passionate environments. And if they
were forced to work in
waterfall development, processes and practices,
they would leave that company
to go chase an XP
shop or an agile environment.
And I'm seeing the same
kind of thing. A lot
of people come up to
me and say, I quit
my job because of Java.
I quit my job because
of.net. I simply did not
want to work in an
environment where we use those
tools anymore. I'm not passionate
about those tools. So I
chose to take a minor
position somewhere else, doing Ruby
on rails. I chose to
go freelance doing Ruby on
rails, and I'm much happier
now. And the interesting thing
is this is not because
Microsoft is short of interesting
technologies. I mean, you look
at what's going on with
link really interesting stuff. One
of our main guy who
looks at a lot of
Microsoft stuff, Mike too, who's
one of the guys who
wrote 10 unit. He's very
keen on the workflow stuff
in windows. He says, this
is really good technology, but
it's, it's almost as if
there's, I don't know if
there's some weird distortion field
floating around Microsoft and that
the interesting technologies aren't getting
out there and engaging people,
Oh, it's yet another add
on to visual studio and
some designer. And, and there's
no attempt to really make
that impact and engagement. And
as I said, I think
the reaction to Ruby is
going to be an interesting
sign of that because there's
an opportunity there to really
say, okay, we can engage.
I've always felt a little
strange about Microsoft and its
size. It's not one company
of 30,000 people. It's about
3010 person companies and they're,
and they're competing against each
other. You know what I
mean? Who knows how many
implemented different implementations died internally
before one, you know, made
it out. There seems to
be this sense that, and
I've always felt that they
should put more wood behind
the arrow head. I had
lunch with Ray Ozzie, the
chief architect of Microsoft while
I was at mics. And
I wanted to understand kind
of the, the plan. And
it was much more relaxed
than I had expected. He
was very developer focused. We're
going to give them great
tools and then they will
make the next big thing.
But I kind of felt
like I was meeting the
Pope and I wanted some
dogma laid down. I wanted
some, some super passionate expression
of, well, just a declaration.
You David are certainly not
in any way, devoid of
opinions. And you have expressed
them some fly some don't,
but you're not afraid of
saying it ought to be
like this. I think people
like that, don't they? I
think they do. I, and
I think that's one of
the reason Microsoft is currently
looked upon with great suspicion.
Right now they're jumping in
all direction. It seems, Oh,
you can choose whatever language
you want. We don't have
any opinions on that. We
spend so much time on
the whole soap, Ws, death
star approach. And now this
rest of looks like it's
gaining traction. So let's do
something with that too. It
seems like there is no
direction. It seems like there's
no focus. And even worse
than that, it seems like
there's great infighting that we
can get this spasm over
the Linux patents. I'm pretty
sure that Ray Ozzie was
really shaking his head when
that press release went out
and like how much of
my good work just went
undone. I have no doubt.
He did not. Okay. That
press release. Exactly. And that's
just one of those reasons
that a lot of people
don't trust Microsoft, they have
so many hats. They're a
Hydra in that sentence. So
even though one guy might
be smiling, another guy from
within the same company is
trying to bite you Well.
And as a Microsoft enthusiast,
and you know, I'm a
Microsoft guy, I'm a Microsoft
guy until I declare that
I'm not a, you know,
they've happily paid my mortgage,
you know, indirectly for the
last many years. I like
the people I have. I
have yet to meet an
individual at Microsoft who I
consider to be evil I've
yet to meet one. I
even, we considered to be
kind of creepy or not
trustworthy. They're just all very
pleasant on an individual or
small team basis. You know,
John Lamb, the guy who was
working on the DLR with
Jim Hagan and two great
guys, I hope that they
are heard at the higher
levels. I hope that someone
up at the top says
this could be something that
we could be a, a
member of the rails community
and have a great implementation
of Ruby on.net. But I
don't know, is it Ray
Ozzie? Is it, Bill's not,
Bill's busy. I know. And
I think that the thing
is that the notion of
evil is, is a weird
term because I don't believe
that in any of this,
there are truly evil people,
but I do believe there
are malicious deeds. And I
do believe that the actions
speak much louder than words
in the sense of a
person can very much be
a pleasant person to be
around. And you can like
that person and still his
actions can be appalling. And
I think that that's really
what they need to be
judged on. They're not being
judged on how nice people
there are. We're not saying
that we dislike any of
them. Personally. We're saying that
as a company, they've done
some deeds as recently as
last week that we, don't
not only don't agree with,
but find appalling and puts
a really bad spin on
everybody else. They are when
it comes down to it,
one company. And even though
there are, there are good
forces. It can very, very
quickly become undone. And every
time a deed like the
Linux spasm over patents goes
up, it erases all of
that Goodwill. They build up.
So it seems very much
like the start building up
good stuff, and then they
take it away. So it's
very fluctuating right now. And
I think they need just
a longer period of time
where they're just not doing
bad deeds. We can't trust
them for three months at
a time. They've had such
a long history to, to
infect us and give us
a certain perception of the
company that they need a
long time to redeem that.
Well, I'm certainly not a,
I don't want to bash
Microsoft and I don't want
to speak to hyperbolically about,
about Microsoft, but I do
feel like to what you're
saying, some leadership at the
top levels and some, some
declarations of like, even than
the Google side of don't
be evil, you know, early
on, they were very out
there. Larry and Sergei were
like, you know, this is
how things are going to
go. And even Google is
starting to get that, that
fragmented sense. You know, there's
all these different labs everyone's
working on something in their
spare time. You can't really
cover up internal fragmentation with
a little toolbar at the
top of the page with
the, and here are the
15 other things that you
could search. And except for
frugal, that was too useful.
We can't give you that.
You know, there's there's, can
you have a company that
big that has one face,
one voice of goodness of
developer empowerment. I mean, could
re turn this around by
making some declarations by shutting
some projects down by putting
some emphasis on others. And
just as the U S
is tempting to do that
as we reach out to
other countries, you mean, as
you're speaking, both of you,
Martin and David too, I'm
seeing these parallels as we
are trying to say, no,
we're really good. We really
are. We're trying to tell
the world we have good
things. And I think that's
a great parallel. Well, again,
it doesn't help to tell
somebody you're good. You have
to be good. You have
to act good. You judge
people on their actions, not
on their words. And that's
what we're doing with Microsoft
in large sense. So I
think they have a very
ingrained culture that came from
a period of time of
when they had great success
in the nineties and so
on where a certain strategy
work, where you could cut
off the air supply. And
that was a good business
tactic that made you billions
of dollars. So in some
sense, why wouldn't you and
taking that out again is
very, very hard. And it's
even harder when you have
40,000 people. Some of them
have worked there for 15
years. That just doesn't happen
overnight. Well, it is comforting
to me to see people
like John and Jim care
about the language. And I
know that as a Microsoft
developer, I would like to
be able to do some,
some rails. And I'd like
to be able to host
it on I S N
and run it in a
data center that runs SQL
server 2005. But until Then,
I am enjoying my time
here at, at the rails
conference. And I appreciate both
of you guys offering the
time to just sit down
and chat with me. Is
there anything that you'd like
to add in closing, sir?
Thanks for taking time to
talk to us. It's always
fun to talk to somebody
who don't necessarily have the
same religion as yourself in
the sense that this is
a meeting of the fateful
cultural exchange here. Yeah, exactly.
And I enjoyed it too.
It's always nice to share
a chat with David because
I can be quiet and
reasonable. Just like when I
was sharing a podium with
campus. It's great to be
the, well, thank you so
much for letting this dotnet
Bedouin come into your, your
camp here. And that's another
episode of Hansel match. We'll
see you next week.